First import cpp20spaceship (#172)
hsf-training/cpluspluscourse: talk/expert/cpp20spaceship.tex

    \item It is provided by default for all predefined types, and return \textbf{something} which can be compared to {\it 0} (such as the {\it std::strcmp}), meaning \textbf{lower than} if this \textbf{something} is lower than {\it 0}, \textbf{greater than} if it is greater than {\it 0}, and \textbf{equivalent} if it is equal {\it 0}:
    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{exampleblock}{Example}
    \begin{cppcode*}{}
#include <iostream>

template <typename T>
void three_way_compare( T lhs, T rhs )
 {
  auto result = (lhs<=>rhs) ;
  std::cout
    <<lhs<<" <=> "<<rhs<<": "<<'<'
    <<(result<0)<<'|'<<(result==0)<<'|'<<(result>0)
    <<'>'<<std::endl ;
 }

int main()
 {
  three_way_compare(1,2) ;
  three_way_compare(2,2) ;
  three_way_compare(2,1) ;
 }
    \end{cppcode*}
  \end{exampleblock}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[20]{The three-way comparison operator}
  \begin{block}{Different kinds of ordering}
    \begin{itemize}
    \item The real return type of {\it <=>} for integers is {\it std::strong_ordering} : whatever the values, you will always get {\it true} for exactly one test among {\it <0}, {\it ==0}, and {\it >0}.

>     \item On the contrary, the return type of {\it <=>} for floating point numbers is {\it std::partial_ordering}, because sometimes the tree tests may return {\it false}, typically if one one the number is {\it NaN}.

Author: Probably NaN has not been adressed yet. Since we never talk about floating point gory details. Yet, we should have some example which justify the existence of such partial_ordering... Or we keep this section a lot simpler, not talking about the different kinds of ordering ?

>     \item On the contrary, the return type of {\it <=>} for floating point numbers is {\it std::partial_ordering}, because sometimes the tree tests may return {\it false}, typically if one one the number is {\it NaN}.

Reviewer: Hmm, leave it. `float` is a good example of a partially ordered type.

    \begin{itemize}
      \item The type {\it std::strong_ordering} is convertible to {\it std::partial_ordering}, but not the contrary.
      \item Between the two, we have a class {\it std::weak_ordering}, where {\it ==0} mean that the two compared values are equivalent from a ranking point of view, but not necessarily \textbf{equal}. In a given expression, one cannot substitutes one value for the other and be sure to have the same result.
      \item I am not aware of some predefined type whose {\it <=>} would return an instance of {\it std::weak_ordering}, but it may make sense for some home-made class, such as the following.
    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[20]{The three-way comparison operator}
  \begin{block}{Home-made class}
    \begin{itemize}
    \item In the example below, we define a very basic class for positive rational numbers, and provide an implementation of {\it <=>}.
    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{exampleblock}{Example}
    \begin{cppcode*}{}
#include <iostream>
#include <compare>

struct Rational
 {
  unsigned n, d ;

  std::weak_ordering operator<=>( Rational const & other ) const

>    { return (n*other.d)<=>(other.n*d) ; }

Author: Interesting. Thanks.

template <typename T>
void compare( T lhs, T rhs )
 {
  std::cout<<std::endl ;
  //std::cout<<lhs<<" ==  "<<rhs<<": "<<(lhs==rhs)<<std::endl ;
  //std::cout<<lhs<<" !=  "<<rhs<<": "<<(lhs!=rhs)<<std::endl ;
  std::cout<<lhs<<" <=> "<<rhs<<": "<<(lhs<=>rhs)<<std::endl ;
  std::cout<<lhs<<" <   "<<rhs<<": "<<(lhs<  rhs)<<std::endl ;
  std::cout<<lhs<<" <=  "<<rhs<<": "<<(lhs<= rhs)<<std::endl ;
  std::cout<<lhs<<" >   "<<rhs<<": "<<(lhs>  rhs)<<std::endl ;
  std::cout<<lhs<<" >=  "<<rhs<<": "<<(lhs>= rhs)<<std::endl ;
 }

int main()
 {
  compare<Rational>({ 3, 4 },{ 2, 3 }) ;
  compare<Rational>({ 3, 6 },{ 2, 3 }) ;
  compare<Rational>({ 1, 2 },{ 2, 4 }) ;
 }
     \end{cppcode*}
  \end{exampleblock}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[20]{The three-way comparison operator}
  \begin{block}{Home-made class}
    \begin{itemize}
      \item Despites the {\it <=>} for {\it unsigned} returns some instance of {\it std::strong_ordering}, we prefer here to cast it to {\it std::weak_ordering}. This way, we emphasize that if {\it a<=>b} is equal to {\it 0}, it only means that {\it a} and {\it b} are logically equivalent, but may lead to different results in some expressions.

>       \item As one can check in the code, we have defined {\it <=>}, and the compiler has added, for free, some default implementations for {\it <}, {\it >}, {\it <=} and {\it =>}. Of course, one can overload them with home-made implementations.

Reviewer: This is technically not correct, because the compiler does not provide the other operators. It rewrites their occurance in terms of `<=>`.
```suggestion
      \item As one can see from the code, we have defined only {\it <=>}, but {\it <}, {\it >}, {\it <=} and {\it =>} work as well. The compiler can express the latter operators in terms of {\it <=>}. Of course, one can also provide own implementations.
```

Author: Thanks for this desambiguation. Actually, that was a point to be investigated in my TODO, because I read contradictory statements about this.

>       \item It has NOT added a default implementation for {\it ==} and {\it !=}. Those operators are generally expected to mean \textbf{equal}, rather than \textbf{equivalent}. If {\it <=>} does not enable a strong order, the operator {\it ==}generally deserves a separate implementation.

Reviewer: I disagree. `operator==` is used to express the same ordering relation as `operator<=>`. So if your class is weakly ordered, then `operator==` expresses equivalence and not equality.
```suggestion
      \item The compiler will NOT express {\it ==} and {\it !=} in terms of {\it <=>}. If your class implements {\it <=>}, it should also implement {\it ==}. The compiler can however express {\it !=} in terms of {\it ==}, so a separate implementation of {\it !=} is no longer required.
```

Author: I would be interested by some resources/references about this point. You describe the class has having a class-level kind of global ordering. If so, I do not understand why `==` is not deducable from `<=>`, just like other ordering operators. If performance is the reason, we may have a deduction by default, and the possibility to overload `==` when one needs performance, just the same as other operators.

Author: @bernhardmgruber Here : https://www.foonathan.net/2018/06/equivalence-relations/, Jonathan Muller explains why one should never implement == if it is not a real strong equality. Perhaps we may agree than when <=> is not a strong ordering, it is adviced to NOT define ==, and when <=> is a strong ordering, == should be defined and equivalent to <=>==0. This would reconcile my feeling that == should mean equality, the fact that the compiler is not allowed to transform == into <=>==0, and your point that == should be equivalent to <=>==0 . What do you think ?

Reviewer: > @bernhardmgruber Here : https://www.foonathan.net/2018/06/equivalence-relations/, Jonathan Muller explains why one should never implement == if it is not a real strong equality. Perhaps we may agree than when <=> is not a strong ordering, it is adviced to NOT define ==, and when <=> is a strong ordering, == should be defined and equivalent to <=>==0. This would reconcile my feeling that == should mean equality, the fact that the compiler is not allowed to transform == into <=>==0, and your point that == should be equivalent to <=>==0 . What do you think ?

After reading the linked article, I have come to agree with you! Consider linking to the article on one of your slides!
So `operator==` should be only provided to mean equality, not equivalence. If `operator<=>` specifies a weak/partial ordering, don't define `operator==`. If you still do it for some reason, make it consistent with `operator<=>`.

    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[20]{The three-way comparison operator}
  \begin{block}{Default {\it <=>} implementation}
    \begin{itemize}

>       \item One can ask the compiler to provide some default implementation for {\it <=>}. Logically enough, it will compare the first member variable of the two objects, and goes on to the next member variable as long as the current ones are equivalent.

Reviewer: Or add it later.

>       \item In the previous example, that would not be relevant, because it will compare the numerators first, and conclude that {\it 3/6} is greater than {\it 2/3}:

Reviewer: I would move that explanation to after the next example.

  \begin{block}{Default {\it <=>} implementation}
    \begin{itemize}
    \item On the contrary, for some tuple-like class, it may make sense.
    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{exampleblock}{Example}
    \begin{cppcode*}{}
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <set>

struct Grade
 {
  double number ;
  char letter ;
  std::string name ;

  auto operator<=>( Grade const & other ) const = default ;
 } ;

std::ostream & operator<<( std::ostream & os, Grade const & g )
 { return (os<<g.letter<<", "<<g.number<<", "<<g.name) ; }

int main()
 {
  std::set<Grade> grades
   {
     { 19, 'A', "Djamila" },
     { 12, 'C', "Charles" },
     { 16.5, 'A', "Marc" },
   } ;

  for ( auto const & grade : grades )
   { std::cout<<grade<<std::endl ; }
 }
    \end{cppcode*}
  \end{exampleblock}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[20]{The three-way comparison operator}
  \begin{block}{Default {\it <=>} implementation}
    \begin{itemize}
      \item We see above that the definition of {\it <=>} has been completed by the compiler with a default implementation of {\it <} (among others), which has been used by {\it std::set} so to sorts its elements.

>       \item Worth to note : if you use the \textbf{default} implementation of {\it <=>}, you will also get additional {\it ==} and {\it !=}. Not sure this special behavior is such a good idea...

Reviewer: I would not judge this design decision and just stick to the facts.
```suggestion
      \item If {\it <=>} is defaulted and no {\it ==} is defined, then the compiler also provides a defaulted {\it ==}.
```

Author: My "worth" was not meant to say it is a good design choice ;)

          \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
    \frametitlecpp[20]{The three-way comparison operator}

>     \begin{block}{What to retain}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \begin{block}{Summary}
```

      \begin{itemize}

>         \item Defining {\it <=>} brings you a free default implementation of {\it <}, {\it >}, {\it <=}, and {\it >=}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        \item Defining {\it <=>} allows you to use {\it <}, {\it >}, {\it <=}, and {\it >=} as well.
        \item Defaulting {\it <=>} additionally allows {\it ==} and  {\it !=}.
```

>         \item The standard library defines few different kinds of order (strong, weak and partial).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        \item The standard library defines a few different kinds of order (strong, weak and partial).
```

    \item On the contrary, the return type of \mintinline{cpp}{<=>} for floating point numbers is \mintinline{cpp}{std::partial_ordering}, because sometimes all tests may return \mintinline{cpp}{false}, typically if one one the number is \mintinline{cpp}{NaN}.
    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{exampleblock}{Example}
    \begin{cppcode*}{}
    #include <iostream>

    template <typename T>
    void three_way_compare( T lhs, T rhs )
     {
      auto result = (lhs<=>rhs) ;
      std::cout
        <<lhs<<" <=> "<<rhs<<": "<<'<'
        <<(result<0)<<'|'<<(result==0)<<'|'<<(result>0)
        <<'>'<<std::endl ;
     }

    int main()
     {
      three_way_compare(+0.,-0.) ;
      three_way_compare(0./1.,1./0.) ;
      three_way_compare(0.,0./0.) ;
     }
    \end{cppcode*}
  \end{exampleblock}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[20]{The three-way comparison operator}
  \begin{block}{Different kinds of ordering}
    \begin{itemize}

>       \item Between the two, we have a class \mintinline{cpp}{std::weak_ordering}, where \mintinline{cpp}{==0} mean that the two compared values are equivalent from a ranking point of view, but not necessarily \textbf{equal}. In a given expression, one cannot substitutes one value for the other and be sure to have the same result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item Between the two, we have a class \mintinline{cpp}{std::weak_ordering}, where \mintinline{cpp}{==0} means that the two compared values are \textbf{equivalent} from a ranking point of view, but not necessarily \textbf{equal}. In any given expression, one cannot substitutes one value for the other and be sure to have the same result.
```

      \item As one can see from the code, we have defined only \mintinline{cpp}{<=>}, but \mintinline{cpp}{<}, \mintinline{cpp}{>}, \mintinline{cpp}{<=} and \mintinline{cpp}{=>} work as well. The compiler can express the latter operators in terms of \mintinline{cpp}{<=>}. Of course, one can also provide own implementations.
      \item It has NOT added a default implementation for \mintinline{cpp}{==} and \mintinline{cpp}{!=}. Those operators are generally expected to mean \textbf{equal}, rather than \textbf{equivalent}. If \mintinline{cpp}{<=>} does not provides a strong order, it is generally advised not to define \mintinline{cpp}{==}.
    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[20]{The three-way comparison operator}
  \begin{block}{Default \mintinline{cpp}{<=>} implementation}
    \begin{itemize}

>       \item One can ask the compiler to provide a default implementation for \mintinline{cpp}{<=>} and/or  \mintinline{cpp}{==}. Logically enough, it will compare the first member variable of the two objects, and goes on to the next member variable as long as the current ones are equivalent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item One can ask the compiler to provide a default implementation for \mintinline{cpp}{<=>} and/or \mintinline{cpp}{==}. Logically enough, it will compare the first member variable of the two objects, and goes on to the next member variable as long as the current ones are equivalent.
```

>       \item In the previous example, that would not be relevant, because it will compare the numerators first, and conclude that \mintinline{cpp}{3/6} is greater than \mintinline{cpp}{2/3}:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item In the previous example, that would be wrong, because it will compare the numerators first, and conclude that \mintinline{cpp}{3/6} is greater than \mintinline{cpp}{2/3}:
```

  \end{exampleblock}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[20]{The three-way comparison operator}
  \begin{block}{Default \mintinline{cpp}{<=>} implementation}
    \begin{itemize}
    \item On the contrary, for some tuple-like class, it may make sense.
    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{exampleblock}{Example}
    \begin{cppcode*}{}
    #include <iostream>
    #include <string>
    #include <set>

    struct Grade
     {
      double number ;
      char letter ;
      std::string name ;

      auto operator<=>( Grade const & other ) const = default ;
     } ;

    std::ostream & operator<<( std::ostream & os, Grade const & g )
     { return (os<<g.letter<<", "<<g.number<<", "<<g.name) ; }

    int main()
     {
      std::set<Grade> grades
       {
         { 19, 'A', "Djamila" },
         { 12, 'C', "Charles" },
         { 16.5, 'A', "Marc" },
       } ;

      for ( auto const & grade : grades )
       { std::cout<<grade<<std::endl ; }
     }
    \end{cppcode*}
  \end{exampleblock}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[20]{The three-way comparison operator}
  \begin{block}{Default \mintinline{cpp}{<=>} implementation}
    \begin{itemize}

>       \item We see above that the definition of \mintinline{cpp}{<=>} has been provided by the compiler, and the use of \mintinline{cpp}{<}  by \mintinline{cpp}{std::set} to sorts its elements has been rewritten by the compiler in terms of \mintinline{cpp}{<=>}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item We see above that the definition of \mintinline{cpp}{<=>} has been provided by the compiler, and the use of \mintinline{cpp}{<} by \mintinline{cpp}{std::set} to sorts its elements has been rewritten by the compiler in terms of \mintinline{cpp}{<=>}.
```

      \item If \mintinline{cpp}{<=>} is defaulted and no \mintinline{cpp}{==} is defined, then the compiler also provides a defaulted \mintinline{cpp}{==}.
    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[20]{The three-way comparison operator}
  \begin{alertblock}{Summary}
    \begin{itemize}
      \item Defining \mintinline{cpp}{<=>} allows you to use \mintinline{cpp}{<}, \mintinline{cpp}{>},\mintinline{cpp}{<=}, and \mintinline{cpp}{>=} as well.
      \item The standard library defines a few different kinds of order (strong, weak and partial).
      \item If \mintinline{cpp}{<=>} does not define a strong order, avoid to define and/or use \mintinlin{cpp}{==}.
    \end{itemize}
  \end{alertblock}
  \begin{block}{Resources}
    \begin{itemize}
      \item https://blog.tartanllama.xyz/spaceship-operator/
      \item https://iq.opengenus.org/spaceship-operator-cpp/
      \item https://www.jonathanmueller.dev/talk/meetingcpp2019/

>       \item https://quuxplusone.github.io/blog/2021/10/22/hidden-friend-outlives-spaceship/    \end{block}

Reviewer: Thank you for providing those!
